Surgical Procedures for Atrial Fibrillation
Quick Facts
- Some people with atrial fibrillation (AFib) need surgery to help their heart beat normally.
- Surgery might include a device placed in the body to help control heart rhythm and speed.
- Maze heart surgery creates scar tissue to help stop AFib.
For most people, medications may be the best option for AFib treatment. But there are also nonsurgical and surgical methods to treat AFib. Discuss your options with your health care professional.
Pacemakers
A pacemaker is a small electrical device that is placed under the skin near the collarbone during a surgical procedure. Wires from the pacemaker go to your heart. The device sends electric al signals to help your heart beat at a steady pace. Some pacemakers can tell when your heart is beating too fast or too slow. If it is, the pacemaker sends signals that help the heart return to the right rhythm and speed.
Watch an animation of a pacemaker.
Learn more about living with your pacemaker. Read about devices that may interfere with your pacemaker.
Printable patient information sheet: What is a pacemaker? (PDF)
Implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICDs)
An ICD is another device placed in your chest through surgery. It can give small electric shocks if your heart beats in an unsafe way. This helps your heart beat normally. An ICD can also work as a pacemaker or defibrillator.
Learn more about living with your ICD and questions to ask your health care professional.
Left atrial appendage occlusion
Left atrial appendage occlusion (LAAO), or left atrial appendage closure, is a procedure that blocks or closes the opening of your left atrial appendage (LAA). The LAA is a pouch in the left atrium that can pool with blood if someone has AFib. This allows blood clots to form. If these blood clots enter the bloodstream, it increases the risk of stroke. Closing the LAA reduces the risk of stroke. It also can allow the person to stop taking anticoagulants (blood thinners) to prevent clots. The heart can continue to work normally with the LAA closed.
There are several types of procedures and devices that are used to close the LAA. These include those that:
- Block the LAA opening
- Clamp the base of the LAA to close it off
- Use a band or suture loop to close it off
If you have AFib and blood thinners aren't a good fit for you, ask your health care professional if LAA closure is a treatment option for you.
Open-heart maze procedure
Maze heart surgery is a complex procedure. A surgeon typically makes small cuts in the top part of the heart. Stitching those cuts together forms scar tissue. The scar tissue blocks the signals that cause AFib. This can help restore a normal heartbeat.
