TAVI (transcatheter aortic valve implantation) is a procedure to improve the blood flow in your heart by replacing an aortic valve that does not open fully.
Page updated:
Next review:
Page updated:
Next review:
TAVI explained
What is a TAVI?
TAVI is a procedure to replace the aortic valve in your heart. It helps improve the blood flow through your heart and into the rest of your body.
TAVI stands for transcatheter aortic valve implantation. It's sometimes called transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR).
Why do you need a TAVI?
You may need a TAVI if the aortic valve in your heart is narrow and does not open properly. This is called aortic stenosis.
Your heart valves play an important role in keeping blood flowing through your heart. The aortic valve opens to let blood flow from your heart to your body.
Benefits and risks
What are the benefits and risks of a TAVI procedure?
Your treatment team will give you medicine to help reduce your risk of blood clots or a stroke.
The benefits and risks of TAVI are different for everyone and depend on how serious your condition is, your age, and your overall health.
Will I need open heart surgery?
A small number of people may need open heart surgery to correct complications that happen during the TAVI procedure. Your surgeon will explain this to you before you have surgery.
Speak to your doctor if you're worried or have more questions.
During a TAVI procedure
What happens during a TAVI?
TAVI can be done under sedation (you're awake, but sleepy and relaxed) or general anaesthetic (you're asleep). You should not feel any pain with either option. Speak to the hospital team about which option is best for you.
A thin tube is put into an artery near your collarbone or the top of your leg (groin).
The tube is guided to your heart until it reaches your aortic valve. A new valve, made of metal and animal tissue, is put inside your aortic valve.
The valve either expands by itself or a balloon at the end of the tube may be blown up to make room for the new valve.
The tube is then taken out and a dressing put over the cut. There may be a small amount of bleeding when it is taken out.
Immediately after your procedure, you'll be taken to a recovery room and a few hours later you'll be moved to a ward.
Some people feel pressure in their chest during a TAVI. Tell the person doing the procedure if you feel unwell or have any chest pain.
Watch our video to find out what happens during a TAVI procedure
Recovery
How long will my recovery take?
Most people go home 1 to 2 days after a TAVI procedure, but some people may need to stay a little longer. Usually, you will fully recover after 6 to 10 weeks. However, it takes people different periods of time to recover after a TAVI procedure.
Are there any activities I will need to avoid?
Before you leave hospital, someone will have a chat about what you can and cannot do. You may also be offered the support of a TAVI nurse while you're recovering.
You may be told to avoid certain activities while recovering, such as:
vacuuming
carrying heavy bags
lifting heavy pans when cooking
mowing
picking up children, grandchildren or heavy pets.
Speak to your hospital team about safe movement during your recovery, like walking. Your doctor can give you more information on getting active.
You'll need to take some time off from work after your procedure and stop driving for a period of time. Speak to your doctor and the DVLA to find out more.
What follow-up appointments will I have?
You should be invited to cardiac rehab. This is a programme of exercise and educational support that will help you recover.
You will also have a follow-up appointment with a cardiologist. If you have any questions after this appointment, speak to your GP or your regular doctor.
What side effects will I have?
You may have bruising or tenderness in the area where you had the catheter tube put in. This should wear off in a few days.
When you get home, check the area where the catheter tube was put in. You should contact your doctor if you notice:
redness or swelling
pain gets worse
bruising gets worse
you have a temperature (over 38C).
When you leave hospital, you'll be given medicine to help reduce your risk of blood clots or a stroke. Ask the hospital team how long you need to take it for and if there are any changes to other medicines you take.
How long does a TAVI heart valve last?
More research is needed before we can say for certain how long a TAVI valve will last. For most people, their TAVI valve will still be in good condition 6 years after their procedure. This will likely improve as techniques and technology evolve.
Get support
It's normal to feel worried about your procedure. There are places you can go to for support and to talk things through:
Speak to one of our cardiac nurses by calling the Heart Helpline.
Order our free booklet on heart surgery. It can help you and your loved ones understand what's going to happen, how to prepare and what your recovery looks like.
To find out more, or to support British Heart Foundation's work, please visit www.bhf.org.uk. You can speak to one of our cardiac nurses by calling our helpline on 0808 802 1234 (freephone), Monday to Friday, 9am to 5pm. For general customer service enquiries, please call 0300 330 3322, Monday to Friday, 9am to 5pm.
British Heart Foundation is a registered Charity No. 225971. Registered as a Company limited by guarantee in England & Wales No. 699547. Registered office at Greater London House, 180 Hampstead Road, London NW1 7AW. Registered as a Charity in Scotland No. SC039426
