Left Atrial Appendage Closure Procedures
Cardiovascular
Stroke is a serious risk for patients with atrial fibrillation, which is caused by a disruption of electrical signals in the muscles of the upper chambers of the heart. When the heart pumps in an irregular, uncoordinated way, there is a decreased flow of blood to the body, which is typically slow moving and likely to cause a blood clot. In the majority of cases, the clots form in the left atrial appendage, a small, pouchlike sac in the top left chamber of the heart. If the clots travel through the arteries in the heart, they can cause a stroke.
If you are a patient with atrial fibrillation who is at increased stroke risk, your doctor will recommend that you be placed on a blood thinner. If you are unable to take a blood thinner because of risk of bleeding or falls, your doctor may recommend a procedure to occlude your left atrial appendage.
Catheter-Inserted Closure Devices
WATCHMANTM Device
One procedure used to close the left atrial appendage is a self-expanding, parachute-shaped device with an attached woven plastic cap called the WATCHMANTM device. This device is approved by the FDA to reduce the risk of thromboembolism from the left atrial appendage in patients with nonvalvular atrial fibrillation who are not good candidates for long-term anti-coagulation. Patients will be required to take low-dose anticoagulant therapy before the Watchman implantation and to remain on it for at least 45 days after the procedure.
The Procedure
The procedure is performed under general anesthesia. The physician inserts the delivery catheter into the body through a vein in the leg. The catheter is advanced through the bloodstream until it reaches the upper right chamber of the heart. The physician makes a small hole through the wall between the two upper chambers of the heart so that the catheter reaches the left atrium. The physician then pushes the device through the delivery catheter into the left atrial appendage, where it opens up like an umbrella and is permanently implanted. Once the device is in place, a thin layer of tissue grows over it in about 45 days. This keeps blood clots in the left atrial appendage from entering the bloodstream.
What are the risks?
Although the device is a permanent solution, there is a small incidence of complications associated with the implantation procedure. Your doctor can go over the risks and benefits of this procedure with you in detail.
What happens after the procedure?
You will have a follow-up transesophageal echocardiogram, which requires sedation, 45 days after the procedure. At that point, your anticoagulant medication will be stopped or adjusted if complete occlusion of the left atrial appendage is demonstrated.
You will have a follow-up clinic visit with your provider six months after the procedure. At that point, you will remain on low-dose aspirin indefinitely.
