Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement (TAVR)
Our Approach
Transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) is a newer, minimally invasive approach for treating aortic valve disease. The TAVR procedure has expanded the possibilities for replacing the aortic valve, and we continue to help shape its evolution.
For people who cannot undergo surgery to replace narrowed valves, TAVR first provided an effective option where none existed. Recently, it also presented a minimally invasive alternative for people who could endure an operation, but faced moderate risk. Now, we are investigating its possible use in an even wider range of people.
WHAT WE OFFER YOU FOR TAVR
- Deep experience, with our program as the first in Northern California and the second in the state performing TAVR. We complete more than 250 procedures a year, the region's highest volume.
- Nationally recognized expertise, with our doctors offering TAVR since its beginning. We have years of experience working with the procedure and contributing to its development.
- Team approach that includes surgeons with previous valve replacement experience and interventional cardiologists who have mastered minimally invasive treatment. They partner with top imaging specialists.
- Access to the latest valves by participating in clinical trials. TAVR constantly evolves. We receive valves still being studied, as well as those released in limited quantities upon FDA approval.
- Additional types of TAVR, with our team often able to do a second procedure when an earlier replacement valve wears out.
- Active research program, starting with TAVR's first clinical trials. A Stanford doctor co-authored the paper on TAVR and moderate surgical risk, and we now participate in a study of low risk.
What Is TAVR?
To schedule an appointment with the TAVR program, please call 650-725-2687
To schedule an appointment with the Valvular Heart Disease Center, please call 650-723-6459
Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement (TAVR)
TAVR uses minimally invasive tubes instead of surgery to treat aortic valve stenosis, with our doctors helping to refine the procedure and expand its use.
transcatheter aortic valve replacement
Heart valve
aortic valve
aortic stenosis
Aortic valve stenosis
Transcatheter aortic valve implantation
TAVI
percutaneous aortic valve replacement
