A CT scan uses X-rays to take detailed pictures of the heart and the heart arteries. The doctor can see these pictures on a computer screen. The pictures are taken using detectors.

More detectors can make the picture clearer. In the UK, the most common type has 64 detectors. Clearer pictures can help the doctor make a diagnosis.

There are two main CT scans used for the heart:

CT coronary angiogram

CT calcium score

CT coronary angiogram

What is a CT coronary angiogram?

A CT coronary angiogram is used to look closely at the heart arteries. It can show fatty deposits, called plaques, inside the arteries. These plaques can reduce blood flow to the heart. This can cause chest pain, called angina, and heart attacks.

For this test, an iodine-based dye is injected into your blood. The dye helps show your blood vessels.

This is similar to a standard coronary angiogram. But a standard angiogram uses a catheter. A catheter is a thin, flexible tube. It is put into the body through the wrist or groin and guided to the heart.

A CT coronary angiogram does not use a catheter. This means it is non-invasive. It may have fewer problems, such as bleeding or bruising.

You may also be given medicine to slow your heartbeat. This helps the scan take clearer pictures.

Why would you have a CT coronary angiogram?

A CT coronary angiogram is the first test recommended by UK guidelines for people who have chest pain and are seen in outpatient heart clinics or chest pain clinics.

It can show your heart doctor if you have fatty plaques in your coronary arteries. The more plaques you have, the more likely you may be to have a heart attack in the future.

It can also show if these plaques may be blocking blood flow to the heart muscle and causing your chest pain.

A CT coronary angiogram may also be useful if:

you have heart failure and your doctor does not know why

your doctor thinks you may have a problem with the structure of your heart

you are being considered for transcatheter aortic valve implantation, called TAVI

CT calcium score

What is CT calcium scoring?

This is a simpler CT scan of the heart. It does not give detailed pictures of the heart or heart arteries.

Instead, it measures the amount of hardened, or calcified, plaques in the heart arteries. This is called a calcium score. It helps show how many fatty plaques are in the heart arteries.

The more fatty plaques you have, the higher your risk of a heart attack.

A CT calcium score does not use dye.

Why would you have a CT calcium score?

CT calcium scoring is sometimes used for people who do not have heart symptoms. It can help doctors better understand their risk of having a heart attack.

It can also help doctors decide if they need preventive medicines. These may include aspirin and statins. These medicines can lower the risk of heart problems.

Usually, doctors make these decisions by looking at a person’s risk factors. Sometimes this is not clear. A CT calcium score can help.

People with no chest pain and a calcium score of zero have a very low risk of a future heart attack. They may not need preventive tablets such as aspirin or statins.

People with no symptoms but a high calcium score have a higher risk of heart attacks in the future. They may benefit from these preventive medicines.

At the moment, this test is mainly used in private practice as a screening test.

Sometimes CT calcium scoring can be used for other conditions, such as heart valve disease. This includes aortic stenosis, which is narrowing of the aortic valve. The test can help show how severe the disease is.

Who should not have a CT scan?

CT scans expose you to radiation. MRI scans do not. Because of this, CT scans are not suitable for pregnant women.

A CT angiogram may not be suitable for people with advanced kidney problems. This is because the dye can make kidney function worse.

It is also not suitable for anyone who is allergic to the dye.

It is not suitable for anyone with severe asthma, because the dye can cause the airways to narrow.

What are the risks of CT scans?

The amount of radiation from both CT coronary angiography and CT calcium scoring is low. It is similar to the background radiation people are exposed to over one year.

But because CT scans use radiation, they should only be done when they are really needed.

To find out more, or to support British Heart Foundation’s work, visit www.bhf.org.uk.

You can speak to one of our cardiac nurses by calling our helpline on 0808 802 1234. This is a freephone number. The helpline is open Monday to Friday, 9am to 5pm.

For general customer service questions, call 0300 330 3322. This line is open Monday to Friday, 9am to 5pm.

British Heart Foundation is a registered Charity No. 225971. Registered as a Company limited by guarantee in England & Wales No. 699547. Registered office at Greater London House, 180 Hampstead Road, London NW1 7AW. Registered as a Charity in Scotland No. SC039426.