TAVI, also called TAVR, is a procedure to replace the aortic valve in your heart. This valve may be too narrow and may not open fully. TAVI helps blood flow better through your heart and to the rest of your body.

TAVI stands for transcatheter aortic valve implantation. TAVR stands for transcatheter aortic valve replacement.

You may need a TAVI if your aortic valve is narrow and does not open the right way. This is called aortic stenosis.

Your heart valves help keep blood moving through your heart. The aortic valve opens to let blood flow from your heart to your body.

Your treatment team will give you medicine to help lower your risk of blood clots or a stroke.

The benefits and risks of TAVI are different for each person. They depend on how serious your condition is, your age, and your overall health.

A small number of people may need open heart surgery. This may be needed to fix problems that happen during the TAVI procedure. Your surgeon will explain this before you have surgery.

Talk to your doctor if you are worried or have more questions.

TAVI can be done with sedation or with a general anaesthetic.

With sedation, you are awake, but sleepy and relaxed.

With a general anaesthetic, you are asleep.

You should not feel pain with either choice. Talk to the hospital team about which choice is best for you.

A thin tube is put into an artery near your collarbone or at the top of your leg, called the groin.

The tube is moved to your heart until it reaches your aortic valve. A new valve is put inside your aortic valve. The new valve is made of metal and animal tissue.

The valve may open by itself. Or a balloon at the end of the tube may be blown up to make space for the new valve.

The tube is then taken out. A dressing is put over the cut. There may be a small amount of bleeding when the tube is taken out.

Right after the procedure, you will go to a recovery room. A few hours later, you will be moved to a ward.

Some people feel pressure in their chest during a TAVI. Tell the person doing the procedure if you feel unwell or have any chest pain.

Most people go home 1 to 2 days after a TAVI. Some people need to stay in hospital a little longer.

Most people fully recover after 6 to 10 weeks. But recovery time is different for each person.

Before you leave hospital, someone will talk with you about what you can and cannot do. You may also be offered help from a TAVI nurse while you recover.

You may be told to avoid some activities while you recover, such as:

vacuuming

carrying heavy bags

lifting heavy pans when cooking

mowing

picking up children, grandchildren, or heavy pets

Talk to your hospital team about safe movement during recovery, such as walking. Your doctor can give you more information about getting active.

You will need to take some time off work after your procedure. You will also need to stop driving for a period of time. Talk to your doctor and the DVLA to find out more.

You should be invited to cardiac rehab. This is a programme with exercise and learning support to help you recover.

You will also have a follow-up appointment with a cardiologist. If you have questions after this appointment, talk to your GP or your regular doctor.

You may have bruising or soreness where the catheter tube was put in. This should get better in a few days.

When you get home, check the area where the catheter tube was put in. Contact your doctor if you notice:

redness or swelling

pain gets worse

bruising gets worse

you have a temperature over 38C

When you leave hospital, you will be given medicine to help lower your risk of blood clots or a stroke. Ask the hospital team how long you need to take it. Also ask if there are any changes to your other medicines.

More research is needed before we can say for sure how long a TAVI valve will last. For most people, their TAVI valve will still be in good condition 6 years after the procedure. This will likely get better as methods and technology improve.

It is normal to feel worried about your procedure. There are places you can go for support and to talk things through.

You can speak to one of our cardiac nurses by calling the Heart Helpline.

You can order our free booklet on heart surgery. It can help you and your loved ones understand what will happen, how to prepare, and what recovery may be like.

To find out more, or to support the British Heart Foundation’s work, visit www.bhf.org.uk.

You can speak to one of our cardiac nurses by calling our helpline on 0808 802 1234. This is a freephone number. It is open Monday to Friday, 9am to 5pm.

For general customer service questions, call 0300 330 3322, Monday to Friday, 9am to 5pm.

British Heart Foundation is a registered charity No. 225971.

It is registered as a company limited by guarantee in England and Wales No. 699547.

Registered office: Greater London House, 180 Hampstead Road, London NW1 7AW.

It is registered as a charity in Scotland No. SC039426.