Cardiac computed tomography (CT) is a test that looks at different parts of the heart. It does not involve surgery.

A CT scan is also called a CAT scan. During the test, you lie on a table. An X-ray machine moves around your body. A CT scan makes very detailed pictures of organs inside the body. In many cases, it can show the difference between healthy tissue and diseased tissue.

The heart is always moving. This makes a heart CT scan harder than CT scans of other body parts, such as the brain. New CT technology at Brigham and Women’s Hospital (BWH) can take accurate pictures of the heart in most patients.

BWH has a cardiovascular imaging program. The team includes heart doctors, radiologists, and other imaging experts. The program brings together care, education, and research from many areas. These include cardiology, radiology, nuclear medicine, molecular biology, medical physics, and chemistry. The program uses many types of imaging. These include echocardiography, cardiac CT, cardiac MRI, nuclear cardiology, PET/CT, CT/MRI, and ultrasound.

Patients with heart and blood vessel conditions can see specialists in many areas. These include cardiovascular medicine, heart surgery, heart imaging, vascular surgery, and heart anesthesia. These doctors work at the BWH Heart & Vascular Center. This center is often ranked as one of the top heart and vascular hospitals in the U.S. News and World Report “America’s Best Hospitals” yearly survey.

Cardiac CT can help find the cause of chest discomfort or shortness of breath. It may be used in patients who have not had coronary artery disease before. This includes patients who have not had a heart attack or coronary stents. Cardiac CT can also help check for coronary artery disease in patients whose stress test results were not clear.

The two types of cardiac CT done most often are coronary CT angiography and coronary artery calcium scan.

Coronary CT angiography is the most common type of cardiac CT. It is used to see the blood vessels that bring blood to the heart muscle. These blood vessels are called coronary arteries. Fatty buildup, called plaque, in these arteries means coronary artery disease is present. In some people, plaque can limit blood flow to the heart muscle. This can cause chest discomfort or shortness of breath, often during physical activity. These symptoms can also have other causes and may not be related to heart disease.

A coronary artery calcium scan checks for calcium in the coronary arteries. It is used for patients who do not have known coronary artery disease. If calcium is found, the test can measure how much is there. Calcium means there is plaque in the coronary arteries.

The doctor can use the test results along with other risk factors. These include blood pressure and cholesterol levels. This information helps estimate a patient’s future risk of heart attack or stroke. Patients with coronary plaque have a higher risk of future events. They are more likely to benefit from treatment with cholesterol-lowering medicines or aspirin than patients with no signs of plaque.

The Heart & Vascular Center is in the Shapiro Cardiovascular Center. It is across the street from BWH’s main entrance at 75 Francis Street. The Heart & Vascular Center brings many heart and blood vessel services together in one place. This helps make care easier and better coordinated for patients.

Before your imaging test, you will check in at the Cardiovascular Imaging Center in the Shapiro Cardiovascular Center. During your test, family and friends can wait in the Shapiro Family Center.

Patients also benefit from teamwork among many experts. These include heart doctors, interventional heart doctors, heart surgeons, heart rhythm doctors, and anesthesiologists. They work with nurses, physician assistants, physical therapists, dietitians, and social workers to help patients have better results.

Learn more about cardiac catheterization in our health library.

Visit the Kessler Health Education Library in the Bretholtz Center for Patients and Families.

Access a complete directory of patient and family services.

Learn about the Watkins Clinic in the Shapiro Cardiovascular Center.

For over 100 years, BWH has been a leader in patient care, medical education, and research. BWH has expertise in almost every area of medicine and surgery.

About BWH.