Transcatheter aortic valve replacement is also called TAVR. It is a less invasive procedure to replace the aortic valve in the heart. It is used for high-risk patients who have severe aortic valve stenosis. These patients cannot have regular open heart surgery.

TAVR is done while the heart is still beating. It does not need a large cut. It does not need a heart-lung machine.

At the Brigham and Women’s Hospital Heart & Vascular Center, heart surgeons and heart doctors work together to do TAVR. They also work with imaging specialists and anesthesia doctors.

Brigham and Women’s Hospital was one of two hospitals in New England and one of 24 hospitals in the United States that studied TAVR in the PARTNER clinical trial. TAVR was approved by the FDA in 2011. Brigham and Women’s Hospital did its first TAVR procedure in 2009. Since then, it has done more than 1,000 TAVR procedures.

This experience helps the heart team care for very complex cases. The team offers different treatment options to help people with aortic stenosis.

The Heart & Vascular Center has 47,000 outpatient visits each year. It is one of the largest centers in the United States. It treats more than 7,000 patients in the hospital each year. It also does more than 8,000 procedures each year at the Shapiro Cardiovascular Center.

During TAVR, a heart surgeon and an interventional cardiologist use imaging equipment to look at the arteries. Your heart specialist then chooses the best and safest place to enter the body and reach the aortic valve.

A catheter is a thin tube. A new valve is attached to the end of the catheter. The catheter is guided into the heart through a small cut.

The new valve is then opened and placed. The catheter is removed. Imaging equipment helps the team make sure the new valve is working well. Then the catheter is removed and the entry sites are closed.

TAVR is less invasive than regular open-heart valve replacement. Because of this, patients often recover faster.

The procedure takes about 90 minutes. It is done with local anesthesia, general anesthesia, or both. Open heart surgery usually takes 4 to 6 hours. Recovery after open heart surgery can take 2 to 3 months. With TAVR, patients often return to daily life quickly and have a high quality of life.

TAVR is a fairly new procedure. It is saved for certain people.

You can learn more about aortic valve repair and replacement options.

The Heart & Vascular Center is in the Shapiro Cardiovascular Center. It is across the street from the main Brigham and Women’s Hospital entrance at 75 Francis Street. The Heart & Vascular Center brings many services together in one place. This helps patients get smooth and well-planned heart and blood vessel care.

Before surgery, you will have a visit at the Watkins Clinic in the Shapiro Cardiovascular Center. You will get information before the procedure. You will also have tests.

On the day of surgery, your care will be given by surgeons, anesthesia doctors, and nurses who specialize in aortic valve disease. The Heart & Vascular Center has one of the most advanced hybrid operating rooms in the country.

After surgery, you will recover in the post-surgical care unit. There, an experienced surgery and nursing team will care for you.

During your surgery, family and friends can wait in the Shapiro Family Center. Staff members will give them updates about your surgery.

Patients also benefit from a large care team. This team includes heart surgeons, interventional cardiologists, medical cardiologists, heart imaging experts, radiologists, and anesthesia doctors. They are all experts in heart and blood vessel disease.

They work with nurses, physician assistants, physical therapists, dietitians, and social workers. Together, they help care for patients.

You can learn more about heart valve repair and replacement surgery in the health library.

You can visit the Kessler Health Education Library in the Bretholtz Center for Patients and Families.

You can access a full list of patient and family services.

You can learn about the Watkins Clinic in the Shapiro Center.

You can download “Cardiac Surgery: A Guide for Patients” in English or Spanish.

For more than 100 years, Brigham and Women’s Hospital has been a leader in patient care, medical education, and research. It has experts in almost every area of medicine and surgery.

About BWH