Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement (TAVR)

Our Approach

Transcatheter aortic valve replacement is also called TAVR. It is a newer way to treat aortic valve disease. It uses small tubes instead of open-heart surgery. This is called a minimally invasive procedure.

TAVR has made it possible for more people to get a new aortic valve. We continue to help improve this procedure.

At first, TAVR helped people who could not have surgery for a narrowed aortic valve. It gave them a treatment option when they did not have one before.

Later, TAVR became an option for people who could have surgery but had a moderate risk from surgery. Now, we are studying if TAVR can help even more people.

What We Offer You for TAVR

- Deep experience. Our program was the first in Northern California and the second in the state to perform TAVR. We do more than 250 TAVR procedures each year. This is the highest number in the region.

- Nationally known skill. Our doctors have offered TAVR since it began. They have many years of experience with the procedure. They have also helped develop it.

- A team approach. Your care team includes surgeons with experience in valve replacement. It also includes heart doctors who are experts in minimally invasive treatment. They work with top imaging specialists.

- Access to the latest valves. We take part in clinical trials. TAVR keeps changing and improving. We receive valves that are still being studied. We also receive some valves after FDA approval when they are available in limited amounts.

- More types of TAVR. Our team can often do a second procedure if an earlier replacement valve wears out.

- Active research. We have taken part in TAVR research since its first clinical trials. A Stanford doctor helped write the paper on TAVR for people with moderate surgical risk. We now take part in a study for people with low risk.

What Is TAVR?

To make an appointment with the TAVR program, please call 650-725-2687.

To make an appointment with the Valvular Heart Disease Center, please call 650-723-6459.

Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement (TAVR)

TAVR uses small tubes instead of surgery to treat aortic valve stenosis. Aortic valve stenosis means the aortic valve is narrowed. Our doctors help improve the procedure and study how it can be used for more people.

Transcatheter aortic valve replacement

Heart valve

Aortic valve

Aortic stenosis

Aortic valve stenosis

Transcatheter aortic valve implantation

TAVI

Percutaneous aortic valve replacement